Petitioner Al-Nashiri, arrested in 2002, has long argued that he is not properly classified as an enemy combatant and therefore is not subject to the jurisdiction of a military commission that is authorized solely to try belligerents. Today, some 15 years later, that threshold determination has yet to be made. That is because the military commission before which AlNashiri is set to be tried will not confirm its own competency to hear the case until trial, which by current estimates will be no less than seventeen years after Petitioner was first arrested. Accordingly, AlNashiri has petitioned federal courts seeking habeas review of his position. Despite the pronouncements of this Court in Boumediene v. Bush and Hamdan v. Rumsfeld--that Guantanamo detainees were entitled to present habeas petitions, particularly in light of the exceptional length of their detention--the District Court declined to hear the case, and the Court of Appeals affirmed.As amicus curiae, the ABA respectfully submits that this Court's review is warranted in this important case for at least three reasons. First, abstention under these circumstances disregards controlling precedent and threatens to render unreviewable threshold jurisdictional challenges by all Guantanamo detainees, not just Al-Nashiri. Second, the Court of Appeals' decision rewrites abstention doctrine by narrowing the extraordinary circumstances exception that traditionally would permit habeas review. Finally, failing to put an6end to the protracted delay that the Court of Appeals' decision would countenance in this case is incompatible with constitutional guarantees vital to the American system of justice.This issue is too important to evade the Court's review. By permitting Guantanamo detainees' petitions to be consolidated within the D.C. Circuit, this Court has afforded the government a single forum for those cases. But this also inhibits the emergence of a split in authority that customarily prompts the Supreme Court's review. Thus, until this Court grants certiorari to review and correct the Court of Appeals' decision, that court's departure from precedent will become binding law for every Guantanamo detainee. This is all the more troubling given that, in deviating from this Court's rulings, the D.C. Circuit has set down a rule that condones the decades-long pretrial detention of prisoners who seek to challenge the basis for their incarceration--all the while being held in the most extreme of conditions